--- Page 1 ---
NC State University 
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering 
ECE 463/563 (Prof. Rotenberg) 
Project #2: Branch Prediction (Version 1.0) 
Due: Thursday, November 6, 2025, 11:59 PM 
1. Preliminary Information 
1.1.  Academic integrity 
• Academic integrity: 
o No collaboration whatsoever:  Each student must work individually on their project.  
There is zero tolerance for collaboration on the project in any form. 
o Source code: Each student must design and write their source code alone.  They must do 
this (design and write their source code) without the assistance of any other person in 
ECE 463/563 or not in ECE 463/563.  They must do this (design and write their source 
code) without searching the web for past semesters ’ projects and without searching the 
web for source code with similar goals (e.g., modeling computer architecture components 
such as caches, predictors, pipelines, etc.), which is strictly forbidden.  They must do this 
(design and write their source code) without looking at anyone else’s source code, 
without obtaining electronic or printed copies of anyone else’s source code, etc.  Use of 
ChatGPT or other generative AI tools is prohibited. 
o Explicit debugging: With respect to “explicit debugging” as part of the coding process 
(e.g., using a debugger, inspecting code for bugs, inserting prints in the code, iteratively 
applying fixes, etc.), each student must explicitly debug their code without the assistance 
of any other person in ECE 463/563 or not in ECE 463/563. 
o Report: Each student must run their own experiments, collect and process their own 
data, and write their own report.  Plagiarism (lifting text, graphs, illustrations, etc., from 
someone else, whether one adjusts the originals or not) is prohibited.  Using someone 
else’s data (in raw form and/or graph form) is prohibited.  Fabricating data is prohibited. 
o Sanctions: The sanctions for violating the academic integrity policy are (1) a score of 0 
on the project and (2) academic integrity probation for a first -time offense or suspension 
for a subsequent offense (the latter sanctions are administered by the Office of Student 
Conduct).  Note that, when it comes to academic integrity violations, both the giver and 
receiver of aid are responsible and both are sanctioned.   Please see the following RAIV 
form which has links to various policies and procedures and gives a sense of how 
academic integrity violations are confronted, documented, and sanctioned: RAIV form.  
o Enforcement: The TAs will scan source code (from current and past semesters) through 
tools available to us for detecting cheating.  The outputs from these tools, combined with 
in-depth manual analysis of these outputs, will be the basis for investigating suspected 
academic integrity violations.  TAs will identify suspected plagiarism and/or data 
fabrication and these cases will be investigated. 
--- Page 2 ---
• Reasonable assistance:  If a student has any doubts or questions, or if a student is stumped by 
a bug, the student is encouraged to seek assistance using both of the following channels. 
o Students may receive assistance from the TAs and instructor. 
o Students are encouraged to post their doubts, questions, and obstacles, on the Moodle 
message board for this project.  The instructor and TAs will moderate the message board 
to ensure that reasonable assistance is provided to the student.  To strictly abide by the 
“no collaboration policy”, students may not reply to other students’ project queries 
unless the instructor solicits input from other students for a particular query. 
* An example of reasonable assistance via the message board: Student A: “ I’m encountering the 
following problem: I’m getting fewer writebacks from L2 to main memory than the validation 
runs. What might I be doing wrong ?”  Instructor/TA: “Maybe you have implemented evictions in 
more than one place in your code rather than consolidating it into one place (efficient and less 
bug-prone).  If so, make sure you are checking for and counting evicted dirty blocks at all such 
locations (or try to implement evictions at one place in the code).” 
* Another example of a reasonable exchange: Student A: “ I’m unsure how to split the address 
into tag and index, and how to discard the block offset bits. I’ve successfully computed the # bits 
for each but I am stuck on how to manipulate the address in C/C++. Do you have any advice? ”  
Instructor/TA: “ We suggest you use an unsigned integer type for the address and use bitwise 
manipulation, such as ANDs (&), ORs (|), and left/right shifts (<<. >>) to extract values from the 
unsigned integer, the same as one would do in Verilog.” 
* Another example of a reasonable exchange: Student A: “ I’m unsure how to dynamically 
allocate memory, such as dynamically allocating a 1D array of structs/classes or (more 
appropriately for a cache) a 2D array of structs/classes. Can you point me to some references on 
this?”  Instructor/TA: “Sure, here is a web site or reference book that discusses dynamic memory 
allocation including 1D and 2D arrays.” 
1.2.  Reduced project scope for ECE 463 students 
The project scope is reduced but still substantial  for ECE 463 students, as detailed in this 
specification. 
1.3.  Programming languages for this project 
You must implement your project using the C, C++, or Java languages, for two reasons. First, 
these languages are preferred for computer architecture performance modeling. Second, our 
Gradescope autograder only supports compilation of these languages. 
1.4.  Responsibility for self-grading your project via Gradescope 
You will submit, validate, and SELF -GRADE your project via Gradescope; the TAs will only 
manually grade the report. While you are developing your simulator, you are required to 
frequently check via Gradescope that your code compiles, runs, and gives expected outputs with 
respect to your current progress. This is necessary to resolve porting issues in a timely fashion 
(i.e., well before the deadline), caused by different compiler versions in your programming 
environment and the Gradescope backend. This is also necessary to resolve non -compliance 
issues ( i.e., how you specify the simulator’s command -line arguments, how you format the 
simulator’s outputs, etc.) in a timely fashion (i.e., well before the deadline). 
 
--- Page 3 ---
2. Project Description 
In this project, you will construct a branch predictor simulator and use it to evaluate different 
configurations of branch predictors. 
3. Simulator Specification 
3.1.  ECE 463 and ECE 563 students: Branch predictors 
Model a gshare branch predictor with parameters {m, n}, where: 
o m is the number of low-order PC bits used to form the prediction table index.  Note: discard 
the lowest two bits of the PC, since these are always zero, i.e., use bits m+1 through 2 of the 
PC. 
o n is the number of bits in the global branch history register.  Note: n  m.  Note: n may equal 
zero, in which case we have the simple bimodal branch predictor. 
3.1.1.  n=0: bimodal branch predictor 
When n=0, the gshare predictor reduces to a simple bimodal predictor. In this case, the index is 
based on only the branch’s PC, as shown in Fig. 1 below. 
 
Entry in the prediction table: 
An entry in the prediction table contains a single 2 -bit counter. All entries in the prediction table 
should be initialized to 2 (“weakly taken”) when the simulation begins. 
 
Regarding branch interference: 
Different branches may index the same entry in the prediction table. This is called “interference”. 
Interference is not explicitly detected or avoided: it just happens. (There is no tag array, no tag 
checking, and no “miss” signal for the prediction table!) 
 
Steps: 
When you get a branch from the trace file, there are three steps: 
(1) Determine the branch’s index into the prediction table. 
(2) Make a prediction. Use index to get the branch’s counter from the prediction table. If the 
counter value is greater than or equal to 2, then the branch is predicted taken, else it is predicted 
not-taken. 
(3) Update the branch predictor based on the branch’s actual outcome. The branch’s counter in 
the prediction table is incremented if the branch was taken, decremented if the branch was not -
taken. The counter saturates at the extremes (0 and 3), however. 
 
--- Page 4 ---
2m two-bit counters
prediction
m
PCm+1 : 2
m
actual branch outcomes(update)
 
Figure 1.  Bimodal branch predictor. 
3.1.2.  n>0: gshare branch predictor 
When n > 0, there is an n -bit global branch history register.  In this case, the index is based on 
both the branch’s PC and the global branch history register, as shown in Fig. 2 below. The global 
branch history register is initialized to all zeroes (00...0) at the beginning of the simulation. 
 
Steps: 
When you get a branch from the trace file, there are four steps: 
(1) Determine the branch’s index into the prediction table.  Fig. 2 shows how to generate the 
index: the current n-bit global branch history register is XORed with the uppermost n bits of the  
m PC bits. 
(2) Make a prediction. Use index to get the branch’s counter from the prediction table. If the 
counter value is greater than or equal to 2, then the branch is predicted taken, else it is predicted 
not-taken. 
(3) Update the branch predictor based on the branch’s actual outcome. The branch’s counter in 
the prediction table is incremented if the branch was taken, decremented if the branch was not -
taken. The counter saturates at the extremes (0 and 3), however. 
(4) Update the global branch history register. Shift the register right by 1 bit position, and place 
the branch’s actual outcome into the most-significant bit position of the register. 
--- Page 5 ---
2m two-bit counters
prediction
n
n
m
PCm+1 : 2
n
n
global branch history
m-n
m
actual branch outcomes
(update 1st)
(update 2nd)
XOR
n m-n
 
Figure 2.  Gshare branch predictor. 
3.2.  ECE 563 students only: Hybrid branch predictor 
Model a hybrid predictor that selects between the bimodal and the gshare predictors, using a 
chooser table of 2k 2-bit counters. All counters in the chooser table are initialized to 1 at the 
beginning of the simulation. 
 
Steps: 
When you get a branch from the trace file, there are six top-level steps: 
(1) Obtain two predictions, one from the gshare predictor (follow steps 1 and 2 in Section 3.1.2) 
and one from the bimodal predictor (follow steps 1 and 2 in Section 3.1.1). 
(2) Determine the branch’s index into the chooser table. The index for the chooser table is bit 
k+1 to bit 2 of the branch PC (i.e., as before, discard the lowest two bits of the PC). 
(3) Make an overall prediction. Use index to get the branch’s chooser counter from the chooser 
table. If the chooser counter value is greater than or equal to 2, then use the prediction that was 
obtained from the gshare predictor, otherwise use the prediction that was obtained from the 
bimodal predictor. 
(4) Update the selected branch predictor based on the branch’s actual outcome. Only the branch 
predictor that was selected in step 3, above, is updated (if gshare was selected, follow step 3 in 
Section 3.1.2, otherwise follow step 3 in Section 3.1.1). 
(5) Note that the gshare’s global branch history register must always be updated, even if bimodal 
was selected (follow step 4 in Section 3.1.2). 
(6) Update the branch’s chooser counter using the following rule: 
 
--- Page 6 ---
 Results from predictors: 
 
both incorrect 
or 
both correct 
gshare correct, 
bimodal incorrect 
bimodal correct, 
gshare incorrect 
Chooser counter 
update policy: no change increment 
(but saturates at 3) 
decrement 
(but saturates at 0) 
 
4. Inputs to Simulator 
4.1. Traces 
Traces are posted on the Moodle site. The simulator reads a trace file in the following format: 
 
<hex branch PC> t|n 
<hex branch PC> t|n 
... 
 
Where: 
o <hex branch PC> is the address of the branch instruction in memory. This field is used 
to index into predictors. 
o "t" indicates the branch is actually taken (Note! Not that it is predicted taken!). Similarly, 
"n" indicates the branch is actually not-taken. 
 
Example: 
 
00a3b5fc t 
00a3b604 t 
00a3b60c n 
... 
4.2. Command-line arguments to the simulator 
The simulator executable built by your Makefile must be named “sim” (the Makefile is discussed 
in Section 6). 
 
Your simulator must accept command -line arguments as follows:  (Note: <tracefile> is the 
filename of the input trace.) 
 
To simulate a bimodal predictor :   sim bimodal <M2> <tracefile>, where M2 is the 
number of PC bits used to index the bimodal table. 
 
To simulate a gshare predictor :   sim gshare <M1> <N> <tracefile>, where M1 and 
N are the number of PC bits and global branch history register bits used to index the gshare table, 
respectively. 
 
--- Page 7 ---
To simulate a hybrid predictor :   sim hybrid <K> <M1> <N> <M2> <tracefile> , 
where K is the number of PC bits used to index the chooser table, M1 and N are the number of 
PC bits and global branch history register bits used to index the gshare table (respectively), and 
M2 is the number of PC bits used to index the bimodal table. 
 
5. Outputs from Simulator 
Your simulator should output the following: 
(See Section 6 regarding the formatting of these outputs and validating your simulator.) 
 
1. The simulator command (which indicates the branch predictor configuration and trace file). 
2. The following measurements: 
a. number of predictions (i.e., number of dynamic branches in the trace) 
b. number of mispredictions (predicted taken when not-taken, or predicted not-taken when 
taken) 
c. misprediction rate (# mispredictions/# predictions) 
3. The final contents of the branch predictor. 
 
 
--- Page 8 ---
6. Submit, Validate, and Self-Grade with Gradescope 
Sample simulation outputs are provided on the Moodle site. These are called “validation runs”.  
Refer to the validation runs to see how to format the outputs of your simulator. 
 
You must submit, validate, and self -grade1 your project using Gradescope.  Here is how 
Gradescope (1) receives your project (zip file) , (2) compiles your simulator (Makefile) , and (3) 
runs and checks your simulator (arguments, print-to-console requirement, and “diff -iw”): 
 
1. How Gradescope receives your project: zip file. While you are developing your simulator, 
you may continuously submit new zip files to Gradescope containing the latest version of your 
project. The latest submission is the one that is considered for your grade. Gradescope will 
accept a zip file consisting of three things: your source code, a Makefile to compile your source 
code, and your project report.  In the early stages of your project, before creating the report, your 
zip file will have only source code and a Makefile. Once the report is completed, your zip file 
will contain everything. 
• Report (included in the zip file once available):  The report must be a PDF file named 
“report.pdf” located at the top level of the zip file , because that is what Gradescope 
looks for when checking completeness of the submission.  See Section 7 and the 
required report template in Moodle for the required contents of the report. 
• Makefile: The Makefile must be at  the top level of the zip file , because Gradescope 
runs “make” with the expectation that the Makefile is at the top level. 
• Source code:  Whether your source code is at the top level of the zip file or  in 
directories below the top level, your Makefile must be designed to compile your 
source code, accordingly. 
 
2. How Gradescope compiles your simulator: Makefile. Along with your source code, you 
must provide a Makefile that automatically compiles the simulator. This Makefile must create a 
simulator named “sim”. An example Makefile is posted on the Moodle site, which you can copy 
and modify for your needs. 
 
3. How Gradescope runs and checks your simulator: arguments, print-to-console 
requirement, “diff -iw”, and timeout. 
• Your simulator executable (created by your Makefile) must be named “sim” and take 
command-line arguments in the manner specified  in Section 4.2 , because Gradescope 
assumes these things. 
• Your simulator must print outputs to the console ( i.e., to the screen), because Gradescope 
assumes this. 
• Your output must match the validation runs both numerically and in terms of formatting, 
because Gradescope runs “diff -iw” to compare your output with the correct output. The -
iw flags tell “diff” to treat upper -case and lower -case as equivalent and to ignore the 
amount of whitespace between words. Therefore, you do not need to worry about the 
exact number of spaces or tabs as long as there is some whitespace where the validation 
 1 The mystery runs component of your grade will not be published until we release it.  The report will be manually 
graded by the TAs. 
--- Page 9 ---
runs have whitespace. Note, however, that extra or missing blank lines are NOT ok: “diff 
-iw” does not ignore extra or missing blank lines. 
• Gradescope’s autograder has a timeout for compiling the simulator and running all tests. 
The default timeout is 10 minutes. This is usually ample time for this course. If the 
autograder times out for your project (very inefficient simulator or a bug that causes 
deadlock), you will see a grade of zero for that submission. Please see Section 9.2 
regarding optimizing run time. Also seek advice from the instructor and TAs, as needed. 
7.  Grading Breakdown, Experiments, and Report 
See the required report template  in Moodle for the grading breakdown, experiments, and report 
contents.  Use the report template as the basis for the report that you submit (insert graphs, fill in 
answers to questions, etc.). 
8. Penalties 
 
Various deductions (out of 100 points): 
 
-1 point  for each day (24 -hour period) late, according to the Gradescope  timestamp. The late 
penalty is pro-rated on an hourly basis: -1/24 point for each hour late. We will use the “ceiling” 
function of the late ness time to get to the next higher hour, e.g., ceiling(10 min. late) = 1 hour 
late, ceiling(1 h r, 10 min . late) = 2 hours late, and so forth.  For this second project, 
Gradescope will accept late submissions no more than one week after the deadline. The 
goal of this policy is to encourage forward progress for other work in the class. 
 
See Section 1.1 for penalties and sanctions for academic integrity violations. 
 
9. Advice on backups and run time 
9.1. Keeping backups 
It is good practice to frequently make backups of all your project files, including source code, 
your report, etc.  You can backup files to another hard drive ( your NFS B: drive in your NCSU 
account, home PC, laptop … keep consistent copies in multiple places) or removable media 
(flash drive, etc.). 
9.2. Run time of simulator 
Correctness of your simulator is of paramount importance. That said, making your simulator 
efficient is also important because you will be running many experiments: many branch predictor 
configurations and multiple traces. Therefore, you will benefit from implementing a simulator 
that is reasonably fast. 
 
One simple thing you can do to make your simulator run faster is to compile it with a high 
optimization level. The example Makefile posted on the Moodle site  includes the –O3 
optimization flag. 
 
--- Page 10 ---
Note that, when you are debugging your simulator in a debugger (such as gdb), it is 
recommended that you compile without –O3 and with –g. Optimization includes register 
allocation. Often, register -allocated variables are not displayed properly in debuggers, which is 
why you want to disable optimization when using a debugger. The –g flag tells the compiler to 
include symbols (variable names, etc.) in the compiled binary. The debugger needs this 
information to recognize variable names, function names, line numbers in the source code, etc. 
When you are done debugging, recompile with –O3 and without –g, to get the most efficient 
simulator again. 
 
As mentioned in Section 6, another reason for being wary of excessive run times is Gradescope’s 
autograder timeout. 
